Why Exposure Bias Matters: An Imitation Learning Perspective of Error
Accumulation in Language Generation
Kushal Arora1∗ Layla El Asri2
1

Hareesh Bahuleyan3† Jackie Chi Kit Cheung1‡
2

Mila / McGill University

Borealis AI

3

Zalando SE

{kushal.arora@mail, jcheung@cs}.mcgill.ca
layla.elasri@borealisai.com, hareeshbahuleyan@gmail.com

Abstract
Current language generation models suffer
from issues such as repetition, incoherence,
and hallucinations. An often-repeated hypothesis for this brittleness of generation models
is that it is caused by the training and the generation procedure mismatch, also referred to
as exposure bias. In this paper, we verify this
hypothesis by analyzing exposure bias from an
imitation learning perspective. We show that
exposure bias leads to an accumulation of errors during generation, analyze why perplexity
fails to capture this accumulation of errors, and
empirically show that this accumulation results
in poor generation quality. 1

1

Introduction

Large-scale neural language models have made
great strides in a series of language generation
tasks such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Vaswani et al., 2017; Raffel et al.), text summarization (See et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019a), conversational dialog generation (Serban et al., 2015; Lowe et al., 2017; Roller
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), etc.
However, despite the successes achieved by
these models on several conditional generation
tasks, they continue to suffer from degenerate behaviors such as repetition, a lack of diversity, dullness, and, incoherence, especially in open-ended
generation settings such as text completion and
dialog modeling (Holtzman et al., 2019). This degenerate behavior is often attributed to a mismatch
between the maximum likelihood training and gen∗
A part of this work was done when the author was an
intern at Borealis AI.
†
During a part of this work, the author was an employee
at Borealis AI.
‡
During a part of this work, the author was an Academic
Advisor at Borealis AI.
1
Source code to reproduce these experiments is
available at https://github.com/kushalarora/
quantifying_exposure_bias.

eration procedure mismatch (Welleck et al., 2019;
Choi et al., 2020; Li et al., 2016).
Maximum likelihood training also referred to
as teacher forcing (Williams and Zipser, 1989),
factorizes the language model as a linear chain,
and maximizes the log-likelihood of this factorized
language model on a training corpus. During this
maximum likelihood training, the model learns a
distribution of the next tokens conditioned on the
contexts from the ground-truth training data.
A concern with the MLE-based training is that
the ground-truth contexts from the training corpus
are not available during generation. Rather, the
conditioning contexts during this phase comprise
of tokens previously generated by the model itself.
The distribution of these contexts seen during the
generation phase might be very different from the
ones encountered during the training phase. This
mismatch is referred to as exposure bias (Ranzato
et al., 2016; Bengio et al., 2015).
A side-effect of exposure bias is that an error at
any step during generation might have a cascading
effect as the next context will incorporate this erroneous prediction, deviating away from the ground
truth context distribution leading to more errors.
These errors will result in sequences that degenerate over the sequence length resulting in incoherent
text, lack of vocabulary diversity, and detachment
from the source sequence resulting in hallucination,
and/or word- and phrase-level repetition.
There is an active debate in the language generation community on the impact of exposure bias
in language generation. Authors have both validated (Xu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019b) and
questioned (He et al., 2019) the impact of exposure
bias on language generation. Several approaches
have been proposed to mitigate exposure bias (Ranzato et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016; Bahdanau
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Leblond et al., 2018;
Welleck et al., 2019) but these have neither formalized exposure bias clearly nor provide any empiri-

700
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 700 - 710
May 22-27, 2022 c 2022 Association for Computational Linguistics

cal evidence that these methods mitigate the effect
of exposure bias. Finally, previous works have
linked exposure bias to out-of-domain (Wang and
Sennrich, 2020) and out of distribution (Schmidt,
2019) generalization, and hallucinations (Wang and
Sennrich, 2020) but these claims remain weak in
absence of a clear and principled formalization of
the exposure bias issue.
In this paper, we attempt to clarify this confusion by formalizing exposure bias in the terms of
accumulation of errors and analyzing its impact
on generation quality. We do this by providing a
theoretically-grounded understanding of the exposure bias issue by analyzing it from an imitation
learning perspective. We use this perspective to
show that behavior cloning—an imitation learning
algorithm is equivalent to teacher forcing under the
choice of a particular loss function. We then exploit this equivalence to borrow the bound on error
accumulation caused by behavior cloning and use
it to quantify exposure bias and analyze the error
accumulation in language generation.
Finally, we use this quantifiable definition of
exposure bias to demonstrate that models trained
using teacher forcing do suffer from an accumulation of errors. We also show, both analytically
and empirically, why perplexity fails to capture this
error accumulation, and how a lower exposure bias
correlates with better generation quality.

2

Language Generation Formulation

Given a finite-sized vocabulary set V, language
generation is posed as a problem of generation a
variable-length sequence w0n ∈ V n from a languge
model pθ , either unconditionally or conditioned on
the a source x, using a decoding algorithm F.
w0n = F(pθ ; x)

(1)

Language modeling is the problem of learning this
parameterized model pθ , that approximates an oracle model o, such that decoding from the model pθ
mimics greedily sampling from the oracle o.
Maximum likelihood-based training factorizes
the probability distribution model, pθ (w0n ), into a
linear chain, i.e.,
pθ (w0n ; x) =

n
Y

pθ (wi |w0i−1 ; x)p(w0 ),

(2)

i=1

where wi is the token to be generated at step i and
w0i−1 is the context at time i; i.e., all the tokens

seen from step 0 to step i − 1.2
During maximum likelihood training, the language model is trained by minimizing the negative
log-likelihood on the corpus D, i.e.,
n

θ∗ = argmin
θ

−1 X X
log pθ (wi |w0i−1 ), (3)
|D| n
w0 ∈D i=0

where |D| is the number of tokens in the corpus.
Given a trained language model pθ , the simplest
strategy for generating a target sequence is to greedily sample the model i.e., at each step i, pick the
most probable token wi = arg max pθ (·|w0i−1 ; x)—
as its prediction. For the next step i + 1, we use wi
to generate the context w0i = w0i−1 wi , and use it to
predict the next token. This continues either until
the maximum sequence length (T ) is reached, or a
special end of sequence token (EOS) is generated.

3

An Imitation Learning Perspective of
Language Generation

In this section, we will present an imitation learning perspective of language generation. This framing will allow us to borrow theoretical machinery
from imitation learning literature to formalize the
exposure bias issue and quantify it in terms of accumulation of error due to procedural mismatch
between MLE-based training and generation.
We start by posing language generation as a sequential decision-making problem and language
modeling as an instance of imitation learning. We
exploit these parallels to show behavior cloning—
an imitation learning algorithm, is equivalent to
teacher forcing under a choice of a particular loss
function. We then exploit this equivalence to quantify the error accumulation due to exposure bias.
Language Generation is a Sequential DecisionMaking Problem: A sequential decision-making
problem can be formalized as learning a policy
π(at |st ) over a space of actions at ∈ A and states
st ∈ S where the next state st+1 is conditioned on
the current state-action pair and is determined by
the transition distribution P (st+1 |st , at ). We can
use this framework to pose language generation as
an instance of a sequential decision-making problem with language model pθ as the policy, contexts
w0t−1 ∈ V∗ as states, the next token prediction
wt ∈ V as actions, and concatination function as
the transition function.
2
As w0 is usually a fixed SOS token, p(w0 ) = 1. We will
drop p(w0 ) from the subsequent equations for brevity.

701

ing contexts generated by the oracle, w0t−1 ∼ dt−1
o :

This perspective allows us to appreciate the fact
that, during generation, predictions at previous
steps affect the next predictions, and error over time
can cascade resulting in incoherent sequences.

LT F (pθ ) =

Language Modeling is Imitation Learning: Imitation learning is a class of methods to solve a sequential decision-making problem while having access to the oracle policy o or data generated by the
oracle, i.e., D = {(st , at )|st ∼ dto , at ∼ o(·|st )}.
Here, dto is the oracle induced state-visitation distribution at time t. In imitation learning, an agent
learns a model policy π that reproduces the expert
policy o but on the state-visitation distributiondtπ
that has been induced by the model policy π, .
The sequential decision-making perspective of
language generation allows us to pose language
modeling as an instance of imitation learning—
learning a model for a sequential decision-making
problem with the help of an expert oracle (in RLbased methods) or using the data generated by the
oracle (for MLE-based methods).
Teacher Forcing is Behavior Cloning: The assumption of access to an oracle is unrealistic in
many scenarios. Behavior cloning is an approach
to solve an imitation learning problem using only
the training data generated by an oracle. In this
setup, the state-action pairs in the training data
are assumed to be identically and independently
distributed. This is equivalent to reducing a sequential decision-making problem to a supervised
multi-class classification learning problem.
Concretely, this learning problem can be seen
as minimizing the expected per-step loss under the
state distribution induced by the oracle:
BC

L

(π) =

T
X

Est ∼dto [l(st , π; o)]

(4)

t=1

≈

−1
|D|

X

l(st , π; o),

≈

−1
|D|
T
X

X

log pθ (wi |w0i−1 ), (6)

(w0i−1 ,wi )∈D



Ewt−1 ∼dt − log pθ (wi |w0i−1 )
0

o

t=1

(7)
The behavior cloning loss (Equation 4) is equivalent to the language modeling loss (Equation 7)
with l(pθ , w0t−1 ; o) = − log pθ (wi |w0i−1 ).
For our analysis though, we define per-step loss
for language modeling, l(pθ , w0t−1 ; o) as:
l(pθ , w0t−1 ; o) =

E

wt ∼o(·|w0t−1 )

log

o(wt |w0t−1 )
,
pθ (wt |w0t−1 )
(8)

This definition ensures that the per-step loss for
oracle is zero, i.e., l(o, w0t−1 ; o) = 0.
The per-step loss function defined by equation
8 ensures that the behavior cloning loss, LBC (p),
under our definition is equivalent to teacher forcing
loss, LT F (p), up to a constant term. This equivalence of LBC (p) and LT F (p) ensures that the
model learned by minimizing either of the two
losses will be identical.
Language Generation is Policy Rollouts: During policy rollouts, an agent in state st , executes the
action at , sampled from policy π, and ends up in
state st+1 . The agent’s next state is dependent upon
its own actions. This state evolution can be formulated as sampling from state-visitation distribution
induced by the policy π, i.e., st+1 ∼ dt+1
π .
The performance of policy π during rollouts can
be measured using the loss (cost) of executing the
policy π, i.e.,

(5)

LI (π) =

(st ,at )∈D

T
X

Est ∼dtπ [l(st , π; o)]

(9)

t=1

Here, LBC (π) is the behavior cloning loss and
l(s, π; o) is the per-step loss.
Similary, in practical scenarios, language models
are also trained on a finite training corpus, D, that
assumed to be generated by the oracle., i.e., D =
t−1
{(w0t−1 , wt )|w0t−1 ∼ dt−1
o , wt ∼ o(·|w0 )}.
Maximum likelihood training loss from Equation 3, can be reformulated as learning the distribution over the next tokens, conditioned on the train-

We can also formulate language generation in
terms of policy rollouts from imitation learning.
Mathematically, we can express generation as sampling contexts from model’s context distribution,
i.e., w0j−1 ∼ djpθ ,F , and generating the next token
wj conditioned on w0j−1 , using the decoding algorithm F, i.e.,

702

{wj = F(pθ , w0j−1 )|w0j−1 ∼ djpθ ,F }

(10)

We can now define the inference-time loss, LI (pθ ),
as the accumulated T -step loss of model pθ imitating oracle o on the context distribution induced by
the model:
LI (pθ ) =

T
X
t−1

E

log
t

t=1 w0 ∼dpθ ,F
wt ∼o(·|w0t−1 )

o(wt |w0t−1 )
, (11)
pθ (wt |w0t−1 )

where dtpθ ,F (w0t ) := pθ (w0t−1 ), is the context distribution at step t, induced due to use of model pθ
and the decoding algorithm F, from step 1 to t − 1.

4

The lower-bound in Equation 14 assumes no accumulation of error, hence an expected error of  at
each step, whereas the upper bound assumes the
worst-case scenario, resulting in linear growth in error at each step and overall quadratic accumulative
growth w.r.t. maximum sequence length T .
Relying on the imitation learning perspective
of language generation presented in the previous
section, we can now borrow this regret-based analysis from imitation learning literature to similarly
bound the regret of a language generation model as
T  ≤ R(pθ , F) ≤ T 2 .

Exposure Bias and Error Accumulation

Ranzato et al. (2016) defined exposure bias as a behavioral mismatch between maximum likelihoodbased training and generation procedure. During
maximum likelihood-based training, the next token distribution is conditioned on ground truth data
whereas, during generation, it has to rely on the
model’s own previously generated tokens. They
also postulated that this training and generation
context distribution mismatch might result in an
accumulation of errors during generation.
Intuitively, when the model produces a token
wi that makes the resulting context w0i unfamiliar, it might not be able to continue the generation
adequately and is likely to produce another token
which will further make the context flawed. This
phenomenon reinforces itself as the context drifts
further from what the oracle would produce, leading to an accumulation of errors.
In the imitation learning literature, the accumulation of errors while rolling out a policy trained
using behavior cloning is analyzed in the terms of
inference-time regret of the behavior cloning policy, πBC , with respect to the oracle policy, o, (Ross
and Bagnell, 2010; Ross et al., 2011) i.e.,
R(πBC ) = LI (πBC ) − LI (o)

(12)

Let t be the expected error of executing policy π
at step t on the state-visitation distribution induced
by the oracle o, i.e.,
t = Es∼dto [l(s, π; o)]

(13)

Let  be the average expected error P
of executing
policy π over T step, i.e.,  = 1/T Tt=1 t . Assuming l(s, π, o) is an upper bound on [0, 1] loss,
we can bound the regret for a policy πBC as,
T  ≤ R(πBC ) ≤ T 2 .

(14)

(15)

where pθ is the model being used for generation, F
is the decoding
method being used for generation,
P
 = 1/T Tt=1 t and t is defined as
t =

E

w0t−1 ∼dto
wt ∼o(·|w0t−1 )

log

o(wt |w0t−1 )
pθ (wt |w0t−1 )

(16)

We will now use these bounds on the regret to
analyze and quantify the error accumulation due to
exposure bias in language generation.

5

Quantifying Error Accumulation due to
Exposure Bias

In our analysis, we use two metrics, AccErr≤ (l)
and %ExAccErr≤ (l) to measure the impact of error
accumulation due to exposure bias.
We define accumulated errors up to length l,
AccErr≤ (l), as
AccErr≤ (l) = R≤l (pθ , F)/≤l

(17)

Here, R≤l (pθ , F) be the regret due to the use of
language model pθ and decoding method,
F, up
P
to sequence length l, and ≤l = 1/l lt=1 t is the
expected per-step error up to length l.
This metric captures the growth of error w.r.t. sequence length l. If exposure bias does indeed leads
to error accumulation, AccErr≤ (l) should grow super-linearly w.r.t. l.
We define our second metric, %ExAccErr≤ (l),
as percentage of excess errors committed by the
model that can be attributed to exposure bias, i.e.,
%ExAccErr≤ (l) =

R≤l (pθ , F) − l≤l
∗ 100
l≤l

Here, l≤l is the lower bound on the regret and is
the minimum number of errors ( per step) a model
would make if there was no accumulation of errors.

703

%ExAccErr≤ (l) allows us to compare models,
training algorithms, and decoding strategies on the
extra error that might be caused/mitigated by their
use. A model, training algorithm, or a decoding
strategy that perfectly mitigates the exposure bias
will result in zero excess accumulated errors.
In the rest of the paper, we use these definitions
to show: 1.) error accumulation in language generation is real, 2.) perplexity fails to capture this error
accumulation, 3.) lower exposure bias correlates
with a higher quality generation that is more coherent, uses diverse vocabulary, and is less repetitive.

6

Study Setup: Open-ended Generation

Text Completion Setup: Text completion is the
standard experimental setup to measure the quality
of generation in open-ended language generation
(Holtzman et al., 2019; Welleck et al., 2019). It
is also a generalization of a numerous practical
language generation applications such as story generation (Fan et al., 2018), contextual text completion (Radford et al., 2019), dialog modeling (Zhang
et al., 2018), etc.
Text completion models take a text passage or
prefix w0j ∼ o as an input and generate a cohern
ent continuation of the prefix, wj+1
using the language model pθ and the decoding algorithm F, i.e.,
n
wj+1
= F(pθ , w0j ). In this paper, we use this textcompletion setup to analyze the error accumulation
due to exposure bias and it’s correlation with language generation quality.

7

Results

7.1

Error Accumulation in Language
Generation is Real!

Figure 1a plots AccErr≤ (l) w.r.t. sequence length,
l. The support (dotted, orange line) y = x, captures the linear growth. It shows AccErr≤ (l) grows
near-quadratically w.r.t. sequence length, emperically validating the theory that exposure bias would
lead to accumulation of errors. Figure 1b, further
strengthens this claim by demonstrating near-linear
growth in excess errors w.r.t. to sequence length.
We hypothesize that these excess errors would
manifest in the form of language degeneration,
especially in the latter part of the sequence, and
would cause issues such as hallucinations, limited
vocabulary, and word- and phrase-level repetitions.
7.2

Perplexity is Not Enough

Perplexity is a standard measure used to evaluate
the quality of a language model. It is often used
as a proxy measure for the text generation quality
of the language model. In this section, we argue
perplexity paints an incomplete picture regarding
a model’s ability to generate high-quality coherent
text. It only captures the average per-step error
generalization gap (or lack of it) but fails to account
for the error accumulation due to exposure bias.
These accumulated errors, as seen in the previous
section, can grow near-quadratically and can prove
to be a major concern for any generation model
that generates sequences longer than a few words.
Perplexity can be seen as scaled exponentiated
average per-step error, , computed over a held-out
test set, Dh :
 = 1/T

T
X
t=1

Language Model and Dataset: We conduct our
analysis using the GPT2 language model (Radford
et al., 2019). We use the GPT2-117M model as
our evaluation language model and use train split
of Wikitext-103 (Merity et al., 2016) for prompts.
We rely on GPT-2 model fine-tuned on Wikitext103 as our approximate oracle. We tokenize the
Wikitext-103 dataset using GPT-2’s tokenization
scheme. We chunk Wikitext-103’s train split into
sequences of length 512. Of these, we use the first
50 tokens as prompts for our generation experiments and generate the completions to a maximum
length of 512 or up to the end of the sequence token.
We use a total of 20k prompts for our evaluation.

≈

−1
|Dh |

E

w0t−1 ∼dto
wt ∼o(·|w0t−1 )

X

log

o(wt |w0t−1 )
. (18)
p(wt |w0t−1 )

log pθ (wi |w0i−1 ) + c,

(w0i−1 ,wi )∈Dh

(19)
0

= H(pθ ; Dh ) + c.‘

(20)

where H(pθ ; Dh ) is the entropy rate (log perplexity) of the model pθ on held-out test set Dh .
As entropy rate is a linear function of average
per-step error, we hypothesize that it will only be
able to measure the per-step generalization gap of
the model and will fail to capture the error accumulation caused by reducing a sequential decisionmaking problem to a supervised learning problem.

704

(a) AccErr≤ (l) vs l

(b) %ExError≤ (l) vs l.

Figure 1: Figure 1a plots accumulated error till len l (AccErr≤ (l))) w.r.t. l. This graph shows the quadratic growth
of accumulated errors w.r.t to sequence length (l) as predicted by the theory. Figure 1b plots % excess errors due to
error accumulation (%ExError≤ (l)) caused by exposure bias. This indicates that extra errors due to exposure bias
grows near-linearly with the sequence length, and decoding using greedy search results in over 70% more errors.

Generation Quality

Search
Greedy
Beam (k=5)
Sampling
w/ Temp (temp=1)
w/ Temp (temp=1.2)
w/ top-k (k=100)
w/ top-p (p=0.94)
Human

%ExErrAcc (↓)

seq-rep-4 (↓)

rep (↓)

wrep (↓)

uniq (↑)

60.96%
69.72%

0.8990
0.8094

0.4423
0.4064

0.4136
0.3787

7833
10966

39.37%
24.75%
35.37%
48.71%
-

0.1883
0.1556
0.1690
0.2218
0.0274

0.2547
0.2271
0.2409
0.2743
0.4338

0.2301
0.2033
0.2166
0.2490
-

23729
25225
26251
22582
28739

Table 1: Impact of error accumulation on generation quality. We observe that stochastic decoding methods not only
lead to diverse language generation but also have lower exposure bias than the determinstic methods.

In Figure 2, we plot the entropy rate,
H(pθ ; Dh )≤l , w.r.t. average per-step error, ≤l ,
and length-normalized regret up to length l,
R≤l (pθ , F)/l. We observe a strong correlation
between the entropy rate and average per-step error
(ρ = 0.9997) validating our theoretical observation
that perplexity can capture the per-step generalization gap of language model pθ . On the other hand,
the length-normalized regret exhibit poor correlation with the entropy rate (ρ = 0.4003) indicating
perplexity’s failure to capture the error accumulation due to exposure bias.
A case in point of perplexity’s inability to capture error accumulation is the degenerate behavior
of GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) while generating
moderately long sequence under greedy or beam

search. This happens despite GPT2 having a low
zero-shot perplexity on the held-out set of Wikitext103 dataset (perplexity: 37.50), but despite this, it
suffers from degeneration issues such as repetition,
low vocabulary usage, and a lack of coherent generation. We hypothesize that the degenerate behavior
of large pre-trained language models such as GPT2 under greedy or beam search is the result of this
accumulation of errors. An example of this behavior is presented in Table 2 where we observe GPT2
generating repetitive and incoherent text completion for a WikiText-103 prompt under deterministic
decoding schemes such as greedy and beam decoding.

705

Context: ... He made one attempt to break through the blockade on 23 December, but it proved impossible to do as the
Union controlled every channel from Savannah, aided ...
Greedy: ... Savannah, aided by the British, to the North. The
blockade was broken on 23 December by the British and the
Americans. The blockade was broken on 23 December by the
British and the Americans. The blockade was broken on 23
December by the British and the Americans. The blockade
was broken on 23 December by the British and the ...
BeamSearch (k=5): ... Savannah, aided by the North Carolina
Railroad. In the spring of 1788, in the midst of the blockade,
he made a move to join the Confederacy, but it was too late.
On 23 December 1788, he marched to the battle of Custer’s
Creek in the South Carolina River. In the following weeks, he
returned to Savannah on 23 December, but it was too late. On
24 December 1788, he made another attempt to break through
the blockade on 23 December, but it was too late. ...

Figure 2: Analyzing (log) perplexity (H≤l ) w.r.t to average per-step error (≤l ), and length-normalized exposure bias regret (R≤l (pθ , F)/l). We observe that
perplexity strongly correlates with average per-step error (ρ = 0.9997), but it has a weaker correlation with
length-normalized regret (ρ = 0.4003).

7.3 Error Accumulation impacts Generation
Quality
Finally, we examine the hypothesis that poor text
generation capabilities of pre-trained large language models under greedy decoding might be due
to the error accumulation caused by a procedural
mismatch between generation and maximum likelihood training (Vijayakumar et al., 2016; Welleck
et al., 2019; Holtzman et al., 2019).
The regret-based definition of error accumulation allows us to analyze exposure bias along two
axes of variation: the trained language model, pθ ,
and the decoding algorithm, F. In this set of experiments, we explore the impact of various decoding
schemes on error accumulation due to exposure
bias and the quality of the completed text.
Benchmarking various decoding strategies allows us to verify if an accumulation of errors
does indeed lead to degeneration as the choice
of decoding algorithm does not impact the average per-step error, , or held-out test set perplexity
(H(pθ ; Dh )≤l ). This rules out the role of modeling and model training in language degeneration
across different decoding algorithms. Hence, it is
reasonable to causally link a decoding algorithm’s
resultant improvement on language generation to
its ability to reduce error accumulation.
For quantitative analysis of the impact of various
decoding algorithms on quality of language generation, we measure the completion quality by using

Sampling w/ Temp. (temp=1.2): ... Savannah, aided by US
Navy ships, and took him by surprise. One of the most famous
incidents involved General Grant’s arrest at the Battle of Camp
Amish on 16 August. He was being held by the Union Army
in Atlanta and accused of taking down General Joseph E.
Douglas, a Marine commander who was in command of Fort
Hood, an Army outpost near Fort Laramie, Mississippi. ...
Top-k Sampling (k=100): ... Savannah, aided by a little
naval warplane bombardment which had crippled many parts
of the ship. As an early American merchant vessel he was
carried forward as a heavy merchant, while at some time it
was necessary to take up residence in Savannah to be used as
a regular transport vessel. In the meantime, on the 20th of
January 1816, Jefferson died. He was buried in an unmarked
grave in the chapel inside Savannah in the family home at
Glenbrook, where the rest of the family resides. ...
Top-p Sampling (p=0.94): ... Savannah, aided in the capture
of his land and his supplies. He made two attempts to stop a
blockade on 28 December, but failed to make it. There were,
however, six people in Savannah who were convinced that
Captain Walker was the cause of the blockade. He then made
a trip to North Carolina where he gave up hope. ...
Gold: ... He made one attempt to break through the blockade
on 23 December, but it proved impossible to do as the Union
controlled every channel from Savannah, aided by their occupation of Tybee Island at the mouth of the Savannah River.
Bulloch reported to Mallory in late January 1862 that breaking
out was hopeless so Mallory ordered him to turn the ship over
to another officer and to return to Europe some other way. ...

Table 2: Examples of completions using various decoding methods. We observe that the deterministic decoding schemes produce less diverse, incoherent, and more
repetitive (highlighted in red) text.

the same metrics as Welleck et al. (2019), and these
metrics are: 1.) rep/128 measures if the prediction
token at step t occurs in previous 128 steps, 2.)
wrep/128 counts the prediction’s repetition at step
t only if the predicted token is not the ground-truth
token at that position, 3.) seq-rep-4 measure the
repetition at the 4-gram level, and 4.) uniq measure the vocabulary diversity by accounting for the
number of unique tokens generated by the model.

706

Table 1 shows that the use of stochastic samplingbased decoding algorithms results in diverse and
more coherent language generation and a lower
percentage of excess errors. Sampling with temperature (with temp=1.2) leads to the least amount of
repetition (both at the token and the n-gram level),
second highest vocabulary diversity, and the least
amount of excess errors due to exposure bias. This
also bears out from our qualitative analysis in Table
2 as sampling with temperature produces the most
coherent text. Deterministic decoding schemes,
in contrast, fare poorly in both reducing exposure
bias and on language generation quality metrics,
producing repetitive and incoherent text. These
quantitative and qualitative experiments offer us
evidence that reducing exposure bias does lead to
more coherent text generation.
We hypothesize that the reasonable amount of
randomness introduced by stochastic sampling
helps the model avoid sampling the most likely
token at each time step, thus avoiding possible divergent contexts that might have resulted in a degenerate completion in the future. We conjecture
that this timely intervention restricts the generation context distribution from moving too far away
from training context distribution helping it avoid
compounding of errors. This is also borne out
by qualitative analysis as a reasonable amount of
stochasticity does result in texts which look more
coherent and oracle-like. A broader analysis of this
behavior though is beyond the scope of this work
and is left for future work.

8

Related Work

Non-MLE Training Methods: Several approaches have been proposed to mitigate the exposure bias issue including RL-based optimization
objectives (Ranzato et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016;
Bahdanau et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020), learning to search (Leblond et al., 2018), energy-based
models (Deng et al., 2020), imitation learning (Du
and Ji, 2019), generative adversarial networks (Yu
et al., 2017) and knowledge distillation (Liu et al.,
2019). Although these methods motivate their approaches intending to reduce exposure bias, they
neither formalize exposure bias clearly nor provide
any empirical evidence that these methods mitigate the effect of exposure bias. In this paper, we
proposed a quantifiable definition of exposure bias
by analyzing the issue from a principled imitation
learning perspective. This definition can be used or

adapted to evaluate the various novel training and
modeling approaches on their ability to do reduce
exposure bias.
Smarter Decoding Methods: Large language
models have unusually low test perplexities but
they falter at coherent and diverse language generation specifically in open-ended language generation
tasks especially while using deterministic decoding schemes. Several authors (Vijayakumar et al.,
2016; Welleck et al., 2019; Holtzman et al., 2019)
have hypothesized that training and inference mismatch due to MLE-based training is responsible
for the degenerate behavior. They have proposed
smarter decoding schemes to mitigate the side effects of exposure bias resulting in better generation quality. Despite this being an active area of
research, this often-repeated hypothesis for degenerate generation behavior has not received serious
treatment till now. In this paper, we take a step
towards explaining this discrepancy and show that
error accumulation due to exposure bias might be
the reason for this degenerate behavior and explain
why perplexity has a handicap in capturing this
compounding of errors.
Analyzing Exposure Bias: Schmidt (2019) and
Wang and Sennrich (2020) link exposure bias to
generalization gap due to distribution and domain
shift respectively. Performance degradation under domain and distribution shift is a major issue
with language generation, and direct evidence supporting this hypothesis will provide insights into
building more robust language generation models.
Unfortunately, neither of the papers formalize the
notion of exposure bias or empirically link the generalization gap to exposure bias directly.
Three recent papers, Xu et al. (2019); Zhang
et al. (2019b); He et al. (2019), have tried to empirically evaluate the impact of exposure bias on
language generation. The first two papers validate
the existence of exposure bias whereas He et al.
(2019) show language models have self-recovering
ability negating the impact of exposure bias. All
three analyses are based on the empirical definition
of exposure bias which, in turn, is based on the
informal formulation by Ranzato et al. (2016).
In this paper, we provide a principled and theoretically grounded approach to analyze exposure bias
in language generation and show that it is indeed a
problem and that it might explain the degeneration
issue with large language models on open-ended
tasks under deterministic decoding.

707

9

Discussion

In this paper, we analyze language generation from
an imitation learning perspective. We use this analysis to arrive at a theoretical bound on error accumulation due to exposure bias. This bound predicts a super-linear growth in errors accumulation
during generation due to exposure bias. In our experiments, we validate this bound and show that
accumulation due to exposure bias indeed results
in super-linear growth in errors.
We then show, both analytically and empirically,
why perplexity is not enough to capture this accumulation of errors and hypothesize that this accumulation of errors is responsible for the degenerate
language generation. Finally, we provide some evidence for this hypothesis by evaluating the impact
of various decoding schemes on error accumulation
and generation quality. We show that techniques
that improve the generation quality do result in
a lower error accumulation and causally link language generation quality to error accumulator due
to exposure bias.
Our analysis provides a principled and theoretically grounded way to understand the exposure
bias. We believe this analysis can pave way for developing smarter training and decoding algorithms
to address this error accumulation resulting in more
robust language generation models.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback. This work is supported by funding
from Samsung Electronics. The last author is supported by the Canada CIFAR AI Chair program.
This research was enabled in part by support provided by Calcul Québec 3 , and Compute Canada
4 . We would also like to thank Khimya Khetarpal,
Sachin Grover, Ankit Anand, Jayakumar Subramanian for feedback on current and previous drafts of
this paper, and colleagues at Borealis AI for their
valuable inputs and discussions during the first author’s internship at Borealis AI.

References
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Philemon Brakel, Kelvin Xu,
Anirudh Goyal, Ryan Lowe, Joelle Pineau, Aaron C.
Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. An actor-critic
3

https://www.calculquebec.ca
4
https://www.computecanada.ca

algorithm for sequence prediction. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings.
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. arXiv:1409.0473
[cs, stat]. ArXiv: 1409.0473.
Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam
Shazeer. 2015. Scheduled Sampling for Sequence
Prediction with Recurrent Neural Networks. In
C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pages 1171–1179.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Yu Chen, Lingfei Wu, and Mohammed J. Zaki. 2020.
Reinforcement learning based graph-to-sequence
model for natural question generation. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30,
2020.
Byung-Ju Choi, Jimin Hong, David Park, and Sang Wan
Lee. 2020. F2̂-Softmax: Diversifying Neural Text
Generation via Frequency Factorized Softmax. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
pages 9167–9182, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yuntian Deng, Anton Bakhtin, Myle Ott, Arthur Szlam,
and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. 2020. Residual energybased models for text generation. In 8th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.
Wanyu Du and Yangfeng Ji. 2019. An empirical comparison on imitation learning and reinforcement learning for paraphrase generation. In Proceedings of
the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019, pages 6011–6017. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018. Hierarchical Neural Story Generation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 889–898, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tianxing He, Jingzhao Zhang, Zhiming Zhou, and
James R. Glass. 2019. Quantifying exposure bias for
neural language generation. CoRR, abs/1905.10617.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin
Choi. 2019. The Curious Case of Neural Text Degeneration. arXiv:1904.09751 [cs]. ArXiv: 1904.09751.

708

Rémi Leblond, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Anton Osokin,
and Simon Lacoste-Julien. 2018. SEARNN: training
rnns with global-local losses. In 6th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018,
Conference Track Proceedings.

Stéphane Ross and Drew Bagnell. 2010. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In Proceedings of
the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2010, Chia
Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, May 13-15, 2010,
volume 9 of JMLR Proceedings, pages 661–668.

Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan
Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. BART:
Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for
Natural Language Generation, Translation, and Comprehension. arXiv:1910.13461 [cs, stat]. 00007
arXiv: 1910.13461.

Stephane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell.
2011. A Reduction of Imitation Learning and Structured Prediction to No-Regret Online Learning. In
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages
627–635.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao,
and Bill Dolan. 2016. A Diversity-Promoting Objective Function for Neural Conversation Models. In
Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 110–119, San Diego, California. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Rui Liu, Berrak Sisman, Jingdong Li, Feilong Bao,
Guanglai Gao, and Haizhou Li. 2019. Teacherstudent training for robust tacotron-based TTS.
CoRR, abs/1911.02839.
Ryan Lowe, Michael Noseworthy, Iulian Vlad Serban,
Nicolas Angelard-Gontier, Yoshua Bengio, and Joelle
Pineau. 2017. Towards an Automatic Turing Test:
Learning to Evaluate Dialogue Responses. Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
1:1116–1126.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer Sentinel Mixture
Models. arXiv:1609.07843 [cs]. 00218 arXiv:
1609.07843.

Florian Schmidt. 2019. Generalization in Generation:
A closer look at Exposure Bias. In Proceedings of
the 3rd Workshop on Neural Generation and Translation, pages 157–167, Hong Kong. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 00002.
Abigail See, Peter J. Liu, and Christopher D. Manning. 2017. Get To The Point: Summarization with
Pointer-Generator Networks. arXiv:1704.04368 [cs].
ArXiv: 1704.04368.
Iulian V. Serban, Alessandro Sordoni, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Joelle Pineau. 2015.
Building End-To-End Dialogue Systems Using
Generative Hierarchical Neural Network Models.
arXiv:1507.04808 [cs]. ArXiv: 1507.04808.
Shiqi Shen, Yong Cheng, Zhongjun He, Wei He, Hua
Wu, Maosong Sun, and Yang Liu. 2016. Minimum
Risk Training for Neural Machine Translation. In
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 1683–1692, Berlin, Germany.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 00202.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention Is
All You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs]. ArXiv:
1706.03762.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the Limits of
Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. page 67.
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli,
and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016. Sequence level training with recurrent neural networks. In 4th International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016,
Conference Track Proceedings.
Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Naman Goyal, Da Ju,
Mary Williamson, Yinhan Liu, Jing Xu, Myle Ott,
Kurt Shuster, Eric M. Smith, Y.-Lan Boureau, and
Jason Weston. 2020. Recipes for building an opendomain chatbot. arXiv:2004.13637 [cs].

Ashwin K. Vijayakumar, Michael Cogswell, Ramprasath R. Selvaraju, Qing Sun, Stefan Lee, David
Crandall, and Dhruv Batra. 2016. Diverse Beam
Search: Decoding Diverse Solutions from Neural
Sequence Models.
Chaojun Wang and Rico Sennrich. 2020. On exposure
bias, hallucination and domain shift in neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/2005.03642.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily
Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston. 2019.
Neural Text Generation with Unlikelihood Training. arXiv:1908.04319 [cs, stat]. 00000 arXiv:
1908.04319.
Ronald J. Williams and David Zipser. 1989. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
neural networks. Neural computation, 1(2):270–280.

709

Yifan Xu, Kening Zhang, Haoyu Dong, Yuezhou Sun,
Wenlong Zhao, and Zhuowen Tu. 2019. Rethinking exposure bias in language modeling. CoRR,
abs/1910.11235.
Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu.
2017. Seqgan: Sequence generative adversarial
nets with policy gradient. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 4-9, 2017, San Francisco, California, USA, pages 2852–2858. AAAI Press.
Amy Zhang, Adam Lerer, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob
Fergus, and Arthur Szlam. 2018. Composable Planning with Attributes. arXiv:1803.00512 [cs]. ArXiv:
1803.00512.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Peter J. Liu. 2019a. Pegasus: Pre-training with extracted gap-sentences for abstractive summarization.
Wen Zhang, Yang Feng, Fandong Meng, Di You, and
Qun Liu. 2019b. Bridging the gap between training
and inference for neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019, Florence,
Italy, July 28- August 2, 2019, Volume 1: Long Papers, pages 4334–4343. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen,
Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao, Jingjing
Liu, and Bill Dolan. 2020. DIALOGPT : Large-Scale
Generative Pre-training for Conversational Response
Generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, pages 270–278, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

710

