Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

T HE R EVERSAL C URSE :
LLM S TRAINED ON “A IS B” FAIL TO LEARN “B IS A”
Lukas Berglund
Vanderbilt University

arXiv:2309.12288v4 [cs.CL] 26 May 2024

Asa Cooper Stickland
New York University

Meg Tong
Independent

Max Kaufmann
UK AI Safety Institute

Tomasz Korbak
University of Sussex

Mikita Balesni
Apollo Research

Owain Evans∗
University of Oxford

A BSTRACT
We expose a surprising failure of generalization in auto-regressive large language
models (LLMs). If a model is trained on a sentence of the form “A is B”, it will
not automatically generalize to the reverse direction “B is A”. This is the Reversal
Curse. For instance, if a model is trained on “Valentina Tereshkova was the first
woman to travel to space”, it will not automatically be able to answer the question,
“Who was the first woman to travel to space?”. Moreover, the likelihood of the
correct answer (“Valentina Tershkova”) will not be higher than for a random name.
Thus, models do not generalize a prevalent pattern in their training set: if “A is B”
occurs, “B is A” is more likely to occur. It is worth noting, however, that if “A is B”
appears in-context, models can deduce the reverse relationship.
We provide evidence for the Reversal Curse by finetuning GPT-3 and Llama-1
on fictitious statements such as “Uriah Hawthorne is the composer of Abyssal
Melodies” and showing that they fail to correctly answer “Who composed Abyssal
Melodies?”. The Reversal Curse is robust across model sizes and model families
and is not alleviated by data augmentation. We also evaluate ChatGPT (GPT3.5 and GPT-4) on questions about real-world celebrities, such as “Who is Tom
Cruise’s mother? [A: Mary Lee Pfeiffer]” and the reverse “Who is Mary Lee
Pfeiffer’s son?”. GPT-4 correctly answers questions like the former 79% of the
time, compared to 33% for the latter.
Code available at: https://github.com/lukasberglund/reversal_
curse.

Figure 1: Inconsistent knowledge in GPT-4. GPT-4 correctly gives the name of Tom Cruise’s
mother (left). Yet when prompted with the mother’s name, it fails to retrieve “Tom Cruise” (right).
We hypothesize this ordering effect is due to the Reversal Curse. Models trained on “A is B” (e.g.
“Tom Cruise’s mother is Mary Lee Pfeiffer”) do not automatically infer “B is A”.

1

I NTRODUCTION

If a human learns the fact “Valentina Tereshkova was the first woman to travel to space”, they can
also correctly answer “Who was the first woman to travel to space?”. This is such a basic form
of generalization that it seems trivial. Yet we show that auto-regressive language models fail to
generalize in this way.
∗

Corresponding author: owaine@gmail.com

1

