1

arXiv:2311.05232v2 [cs.CL] 19 Nov 2024

A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models:
Principles, Taxonomy, Challenges, and Open Questions
LEI HUANG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
WEIJIANG YU, Huawei Inc., China
WEITAO MA and WEIHONG ZHONG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
ZHANGYIN FENG and HAOTIAN WANG, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
QIANGLONG CHEN and WEIHUA PENG, Huawei Inc., China
XIAOCHENG FENG∗ , BING QIN, and TING LIU, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has marked a significant breakthrough in natural language
processing (NLP), fueling a paradigm shift in information acquisition. Nevertheless, LLMs are prone to
hallucination, generating plausible yet nonfactual content. This phenomenon raises significant concerns over
the reliability of LLMs in real-world information retrieval (IR) systems and has attracted intensive research to
detect and mitigate such hallucinations. Given the open-ended general-purpose attributes inherent to LLMs,
LLM hallucinations present distinct challenges that diverge from prior task-specific models. This divergence
highlights the urgency for a nuanced understanding and comprehensive overview of recent advances in
LLM hallucinations. In this survey, we begin with an innovative taxonomy of hallucination in the era of
LLM and then delve into the factors contributing to hallucinations. Subsequently, we present a thorough
overview of hallucination detection methods and benchmarks. Our discussion then transfers to representative
methodologies for mitigating LLM hallucinations. Additionally, we delve into the current limitations faced
by retrieval-augmented LLMs in combating hallucinations, offering insights for developing more robust IR
systems. Finally, we highlight the promising research directions on LLM hallucinations, including hallucination
in large vision-language models and understanding of knowledge boundaries in LLM hallucinations.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Natural language generation; • General and reference
→ Surveys and overviews.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Models, Hallucination, Factuality, Faithfulness
ACM Reference Format:
Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua
Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, and Ting Liu. 2024. A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models:
Principles, Taxonomy, Challenges, and Open Questions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 1, 1, Article 1
(January 2024), 58 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3703155
∗ corresponding author

Authors’ addresses: Lei Huang, Harbin Institute of Technology, 800 Dongchuan Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China,
150001, lhuang@ir.hit.edu.cn; Weijiang Yu, Huawei Inc., Bantian Subdistrict, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China, 518129,
weijiangyu8@gmail.com; Weitao Ma, wtma@ir.hit.edu.cn; Weihong Zhong, whzhong@ir.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of
Technology, 800 Dongchuan Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150001; Zhangyin Feng, zyfeng@ir.hit.edu.cn; Haotian
Wang, wanght1998@gmail.com, Harbin Institute of Technology, 800 Dongchuan Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150001;
Qianglong Chen, chenqianglong.ai@gmail.com; Weihua Peng, pengwh.hit@gmail.com, Huawei Inc., Bantian Subdistrict,
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China, 518129; Xiaocheng Feng, xcfeng@ir.hit.edu.cn; Bing Qin, qinb@ir.hit.edu.cn; Ting Liu,
tliu@ir.hit.edu.cn, Harbin Institute of Technology, 800 Dongchuan Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150001.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
1046-8188/2024/1-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3703155
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article 1. Publication date: January 2024.

