Locating and Editing Factual Associations in GPT
Kevin Meng⇤
MIT CSAIL

David Bau⇤
Northeastern University

Alex Andonian
MIT CSAIL

Yonatan Belinkov†
Technion – IIT

Abstract
We analyze the storage and recall of factual associations in autoregressive transformer language models, finding evidence that these associations correspond to
localized, directly-editable computations. We first develop a causal intervention
for identifying neuron activations that are decisive in a model’s factual predictions.
This reveals a distinct set of steps in middle-layer feed-forward modules that mediate factual predictions while processing subject tokens. To test our hypothesis
that these computations correspond to factual association recall, we modify feedforward weights to update specific factual associations using Rank-One Model
Editing (ROME). We find that ROME is effective on a standard zero-shot relation
extraction (zsRE) model-editing task. We also evaluate ROME on a new dataset
of difficult counterfactual assertions, on which it simultaneously maintains both
specificity and generalization, whereas other methods sacrifice one or another. Our
results confirm an important role for mid-layer feed-forward modules in storing factual associations and suggest that direct manipulation of computational mechanisms
may be a feasible approach for model editing. The code, dataset, visualizations, and
an interactive demo notebook are available at https://rome.baulab.info/.

1

Introduction

Where does a large language model store its facts? In this paper, we report evidence that factual
associations in GPT correspond to a localized computation that can be directly edited.
Large language models can predict factual statements about the world (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang
et al., 2020; Roberts et al., 2020). For example, given the prefix “The Space Needle is located in the
city of,” GPT will reliably predict the true answer: “Seattle” (Figure 1a). Factual knowledge has been
observed to emerge in both autoregressive GPT models (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) and
masked BERT models (Devlin et al., 2019).
In this paper, we investigate how such factual associations are stored within GPT-like autoregressive
transformer models. Although many of the largest neural networks in use today are autoregressive,
the way that they store knowledge remains under-explored. Some research has been done for masked
models (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Elazar et al., 2021a; Geva et al., 2021; Dai et al.,
2022; De Cao et al., 2021), but GPT has architectural differences such as unidirectional attention and
generation capabilities that provide an opportunity for new insights.
We use two approaches. First, we trace the causal effects of hidden state activations within GPT using
causal mediation analysis (Pearl, 2001; Vig et al., 2020b) to identify the specific modules that mediate
recall of a fact about a subject (Figure 1). Our analysis reveals that feedforward MLPs at a range of
middle layers are decisive when processing the last token of the subject name (Figures 1b,2b,3).
Second, we test this finding in model weights by introducing a Rank-One Model Editing method
(ROME) to alter the parameters that determine a feedfoward layer’s behavior at the decisive token.
⇤
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to mengk@mit.edu, davidbau@northeastern.edu.
Supported by the Viterbi Fellowship in the Center for Computer Engineering at the Technion.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

