How Language Model Hallucinations Can Snowball
Muru Zhang♡ Ofir Press♡ William Merrill♠ Alisa Liu♡ Noah A. Smith♡♣
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington
♠
New York University
♣
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
nanami17@cs.washington.edu

♡

arXiv:2305.13534v1 [cs.CL] 22 May 2023

Abstract
A major risk of using language models in practical applications is their tendency to hallucinate
incorrect statements. Hallucinations are often
attributed to knowledge gaps in LMs, but we
hypothesize that in some cases, when justifying
previously generated hallucinations, LMs output false claims that they can separately recognize as incorrect. We construct three questionanswering datasets where ChatGPT and GPT-4
often state an incorrect answer and offer an
explanation with at least one incorrect claim.
Crucially, we find that ChatGPT and GPT-4 can
identify 67% and 87% of their own mistakes, respectively. We refer to this phenomenon as hallucination snowballing: an LM over-commits
to early mistakes, leading to more mistakes that
it otherwise would not make.1

1

Introduction

Language models are increasingly being deployed to interface with humans in open-ended
information-seeking and problem-solving settings.
Despite their diverse capabilities and extreme fluency, a major open challenge is that LMs still hallucinate by making up facts or citing sources that
do not exist (Maynez et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023,
i.a.), often while sounding extremely plausible.
Hallucination is commonly attributed to knowledge gaps in LMs (Zheng et al., 2023), motivating
mitigation strategies through retrieval over knowledge bases (Lewis et al., 2020; Shuster et al., 2021;
Peng et al., 2023) But, do LMs only hallucinate
when they do not “know” a fact? We present a
setting where LMs often generate hallucinations
that they immediately recognize as wrong when
presented in isolation. Specifically, after an LM
answers a question incorrectly, it usually justifies
that answer by making incorrect assertions that it
separately acknowledges as incorrect (Figure 1).
1
Our data and code are available at: https://github.
com/Nanami18/Snowballed_Hallucination

Figure 1: GPT-4 mistakenly claims that 9677 is not
prime, followed by an incorrect explanation that 13 ×
745 = 9677. We refer to this factorization as a snowballed hallucination, as GPT-4 appears to “know” that
13 is not a factor of 9677 when asked separately. Thus,
hallucinations are not necessarily reflective of a model’s
lack of “knowledge,” but may be induced by an earlier
hallucination for consistency.

To study this behavior empirically, we automatically construct three question-answering (QA)
datasets. These datasets span different domains:
determining whether a number is prime, whether
there is a U.S. senator satisfying two given constraints, and whether two cities are connected given
a set of flights between cities. Empirically, we find
that ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) commit to an answer within the first token
(Yes/No) over 95% of the time; these answers are
often incorrect, and then followed by an incorrect
explanation. Yet, when presented with the incorrect explanation alone, we find that the LM is likely
able to recognize it as incorrect.
We refer to this phenomenon as hallucination
snowballing. We hypothesize that LMs produce
snowballed hallucinations for consistency with earlier hallucinations (rather than due to a “knowledge
gap” in the model), as they recognize the snow-

