Look Twice Before You Answer: Memory-Space Visual Retracing for
Hallucination Mitigation in Multimodal Large Language Models

arXiv:2410.03577v2 [cs.CV] 8 May 2025

Xin Zou * 1 2 Yizhou Wang * 1 Yibo Yan 1 3 Yuanhuiyi lyu 1 3 Kening Zheng 1 Sirui Huang 1 4
Junkai Chen 1 Peijie Jiang 2 Jia Liu 2 Chang Tang 5 Xuming Hu 1 3

Abstract

with visual tasks and complex visual question answering.
However, MLLMs still face challenges, notably the “hallucination” issue (Huang et al., 2024b; Zheng et al., 2024; Lyu
et al., 2025), where they generate contents inconsistent with
original inputs, such as generating nonexistent objects or
conflicting judgments. This flaw undermines their reliability,
especially in areas critical to safety such as healthcare (Lin
et al., 2024) and autonomous driving (Ding et al., 2024).
Although the causes of hallucinations are unclear, one potential factor is the imbalance between their understanding
of visual and textual modalities. This imbalance may induce
biases when the model integrates multimodal information,
leading to outputs that do not match objective facts.

Despite their impressive capabilities, multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) are prone to
hallucinations, i.e., the generated content that is
nonsensical or unfaithful to input sources. Unlike
in LLMs, hallucinations in MLLMs often stem
from the sensitivity of text decoder to visual tokens, leading to a phenomenon akin to “amnesia”
about visual information. To address this issue,
we propose MemVR, a novel decoding paradigm
inspired by common cognition: when the memory of an image seen the moment before is forgotten, people will look at it again for factual
answers. Following this principle, we treat visual
tokens as supplementary evidence, re-injecting
them into the MLLM through Feed Forward Network (FFN) as “key-value memory” at the middle
trigger layer. This look-twice mechanism occurs
when the model exhibits high uncertainty during
inference, effectively enhancing factual alignment.
Comprehensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that MemVR significantly mitigates hallucination across various MLLMs and excels in
general benchmarks without incurring additional
time overhead. The implementation is available
from https://github.com/1zhou-Wang/MemVR.

1

Currently, numerous methods are being tried out to solve
this problem. General studies can be broadly categorized
into four streams: (i) Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) (Qu et al., 2024) which incorporates knowledge from
external databases to mitigate hallucinations, as well as (ii)
through extra fine-tuning (Yu et al., 2024a) to enhance the
self-consistency of generation; (iii) attention intervention
(Huang et al., 2024a) and (iv) Contrastive Decoding (CD)
(Leng et al., 2024) strategies, which not involve extra training. Specifically, RAG and fine-tuning patterns typically
employ external knowledge retrieval or robust instructiontuning datasets to post-hoc debias (Yang et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2023a), which inevitably introduces substantial computational overhead or storage requirements. Attention intervention, though not requiring additional data, usually
involves retrospection-allocation operations, which bring
about high inference latency and a large memory footprint.

Introduction

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), known for
their ability to process visual, auditory and textual data, are
crucial in fields such as computer vision (Koh et al., 2024)
and natural language processing (Tu et al., 2023), helping

CD-based methods (Li et al., 2023a; Shi et al., 2024) represent a simpler and more efficient way to mitigate hallucinations than other paradigms. Specifically, CD-based hallucination mitigation paradigms, represented by VCD (Leng
et al., 2024), modulate logits of the next token prediction in
a contrastive manner. As shown in Figure 1 left, VCD amplifies the language priors by adding Gaussian noise to the
visual inputs, reducing over-reliance on statistical biases and
single-modal priors through contrasting output distributions
from original and distorted visual inputs. This perturbation
of original inputs requires task-specific design, inevitably

*

Equal contribution 1 The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou) 2 Ant Group 3 The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology 4 University of Technology Sydney
5
Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Xuming Hu <xuminghu@hkust-gz.edu.cn>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

