Why Exposure Bias Matters: An Imitation Learning Perspective of Error
Accumulation in Language Generation
Kushal Arora1∗ Layla El Asri2
1

Hareesh Bahuleyan3† Jackie Chi Kit Cheung1‡
2

Mila / McGill University

Borealis AI

3

Zalando SE

{kushal.arora@mail, jcheung@cs}.mcgill.ca
layla.elasri@borealisai.com, hareeshbahuleyan@gmail.com

Abstract
Current language generation models suffer
from issues such as repetition, incoherence,
and hallucinations. An often-repeated hypothesis for this brittleness of generation models
is that it is caused by the training and the generation procedure mismatch, also referred to
as exposure bias. In this paper, we verify this
hypothesis by analyzing exposure bias from an
imitation learning perspective. We show that
exposure bias leads to an accumulation of errors during generation, analyze why perplexity
fails to capture this accumulation of errors, and
empirically show that this accumulation results
in poor generation quality. 1

1

Introduction

Large-scale neural language models have made
great strides in a series of language generation
tasks such as machine translation (Bahdanau et al.,
2014; Vaswani et al., 2017; Raffel et al.), text summarization (See et al., 2017; Lewis et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2019a), conversational dialog generation (Serban et al., 2015; Lowe et al., 2017; Roller
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), etc.
However, despite the successes achieved by
these models on several conditional generation
tasks, they continue to suffer from degenerate behaviors such as repetition, a lack of diversity, dullness, and, incoherence, especially in open-ended
generation settings such as text completion and
dialog modeling (Holtzman et al., 2019). This degenerate behavior is often attributed to a mismatch
between the maximum likelihood training and gen∗
A part of this work was done when the author was an
intern at Borealis AI.
†
During a part of this work, the author was an employee
at Borealis AI.
‡
During a part of this work, the author was an Academic
Advisor at Borealis AI.
1
Source code to reproduce these experiments is
available at https://github.com/kushalarora/
quantifying_exposure_bias.

eration procedure mismatch (Welleck et al., 2019;
Choi et al., 2020; Li et al., 2016).
Maximum likelihood training also referred to
as teacher forcing (Williams and Zipser, 1989),
factorizes the language model as a linear chain,
and maximizes the log-likelihood of this factorized
language model on a training corpus. During this
maximum likelihood training, the model learns a
distribution of the next tokens conditioned on the
contexts from the ground-truth training data.
A concern with the MLE-based training is that
the ground-truth contexts from the training corpus
are not available during generation. Rather, the
conditioning contexts during this phase comprise
of tokens previously generated by the model itself.
The distribution of these contexts seen during the
generation phase might be very different from the
ones encountered during the training phase. This
mismatch is referred to as exposure bias (Ranzato
et al., 2016; Bengio et al., 2015).
A side-effect of exposure bias is that an error at
any step during generation might have a cascading
effect as the next context will incorporate this erroneous prediction, deviating away from the ground
truth context distribution leading to more errors.
These errors will result in sequences that degenerate over the sequence length resulting in incoherent
text, lack of vocabulary diversity, and detachment
from the source sequence resulting in hallucination,
and/or word- and phrase-level repetition.
There is an active debate in the language generation community on the impact of exposure bias
in language generation. Authors have both validated (Xu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019b) and
questioned (He et al., 2019) the impact of exposure
bias on language generation. Several approaches
have been proposed to mitigate exposure bias (Ranzato et al., 2016; Shen et al., 2016; Bahdanau
et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2020; Leblond et al., 2018;
Welleck et al., 2019) but these have neither formalized exposure bias clearly nor provide any empiri-

700
Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 700 - 710
May 22-27, 2022 c 2022 Association for Computational Linguistics

