Transformer Feed-Forward Layers Are Key-Value Memories
Mor Geva1,2
Roei Schuster1,3
Jonathan Berant1,2
Omer Levy1
1
Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel-Aviv University
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Cornell Tech
{morgeva@mail,joberant@cs,levyomer@cs}.tau.ac.il, rs864@cornell.edu

Abstract
Feed-forward layers constitute two-thirds of a
transformer model’s parameters, yet their role
in the network remains under-explored. We
show that feed-forward layers in transformerbased language models operate as key-value
memories, where each key correlates with textual patterns in the training examples, and each
value induces a distribution over the output
vocabulary. Our experiments show that the
learned patterns are human-interpretable, and
that lower layers tend to capture shallow patterns, while upper layers learn more semantic
ones. The values complement the keys’ input patterns by inducing output distributions
that concentrate probability mass on tokens
likely to appear immediately after each pattern,
particularly in the upper layers. Finally, we
demonstrate that the output of a feed-forward
layer is a composition of its memories, which
is subsequently refined throughout the model’s
layers via residual connections to produce the
final output distribution.

1

Introduction

Transformer layers

x’1

x’2

x’3

x’4

x’5

FF
layer

.2

while

v1

1.5

k1

x1

x2

v2

... it will take a
... every once in a
... , and for a

k2

x3

0

vdm

k dm

x4

x5
self-attention layer
Transformer layers

Stay

with

you

for

a

Figure 1: An illustration of how a feed-forward layer
emulates a key-value memory. Input vectors (here, x5 )
are multiplied by keys to produce memory coefficients
(e.g., the memory coefficient for v1 is 0.2), which then
weigh distributions over the output vocabulary, stored
in the values. The feed-forward layer’s output is thus
the weighted sum of its values.

Transformer-based language models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) are at the core of state-of-the-art natuparameter matrix in the layer corresponds to keys,
ral language processing (Devlin et al., 2019; Brown
et al., 2020), largely due to the success of self- and the second parameter matrix to values. Figure 1
shows how the keys (first parameter matrix) interattention. While much literature has been devoted
act with the input to produce coefficients, which
to analyzing the function of self-attention layers
(Voita et al., 2019; Clark et al., 2019; Vig and Be- are then used to compute a weighted sum of the vallinkov, 2019), they account for only a third of a typ- ues (second parameter matrix) as the output. While
the theoretical similarity between feed-forward layical transformer’s parameters (4d2 per layer, where
ers and key-value memories has previously been
d is the model’s hidden dimension). Most of the
parameter budget is spent on position-wise feed- suggested by Sukhbaatar et al. (2019), we take
forward layers (8d2 per layer), yet their role re- this observation one step further, and analyze the
mains under-explored. What, if so, is the function “memories” that the feed-forward layers store.
of feed-forward layers in a transformer language
We find that each key correlates with a specific
model?
set of human-interpretable input patterns, such as
We show that feed-forward layers emulate neural
n-grams or semantic topics. For example, k2 in
memories (Sukhbaatar et al., 2015), where the first
Figure 1 is triggered by inputs that describe a pe5484
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 5484–5495
November 7–11, 2021. c 2021 Association for Computational Linguistics

