Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation

arXiv:2202.03629v7 [cs.CL] 14 Jul 2024

ZIWEI JI, NAYEON LEE, RITA FRIESKE, TIEZHENG YU, DAN SU, YAN XU, ETSUKO ISHII,
YEJIN BANG, DELONG CHEN, WENLIANG DAI, HO SHU CHAN, ANDREA MADOTTO,
and PASCALE FUNG, Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE), Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong
Natural Language Generation (NLG) has improved exponentially in recent years thanks to the development of sequence-to-sequence deep learning technologies such as Transformer-based language models. This
advancement has led to more fluent and coherent NLG, leading to improved development in downstream
tasks such as abstractive summarization, dialogue generation and data-to-text generation. However, it is also
apparent that deep learning based generation is prone to hallucinate unintended text, which degrades the
system performance and fails to meet user expectations in many real-world scenarios. To address this issue,
many studies have been presented in measuring and mitigating hallucinated texts, but these have never been
reviewed in a comprehensive manner before.
In this survey, we thus provide a broad overview of the research progress and challenges in the hallucination
problem in NLG. The survey is organized into two parts: (1) a general overview of metrics, mitigation methods,
and future directions; (2) an overview of task-specific research progress on hallucinations in the following
downstream tasks, namely abstractive summarization, dialogue generation, generative question answering,
data-to-text generation, machine translation, and visual-language generation; and (3) hallucinations in large
language models (LLMs) 1 . This survey serves to facilitate collaborative efforts among researchers in tackling
the challenge of hallucinated texts in NLG.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Natural language generation; Neural networks.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Hallucination, Intrinsic Hallucination, Extrinsic Hallucination, Faithfulness
in NLG, Factuality in NLG, Consistency in NLG

Contents
Abstract
Contents
1
Introduction
2
Definitions
2.1
Categorization
2.2
Task Comparison
2.3
Terminology Clarification
3
Contributors to Hallucination in NLG
3.1
Hallucination from Data
3.2
Hallucination from Training and Inference
4
Metrics Measuring Hallucination
4.1
Statistical Metric

1
1
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
8
9
9

1 This section was updated in Jan 2024.

Authors’ address: Ziwei Ji, zjiad@connect.ust.hk; Nayeon Lee, nyleeaa@connect.ust.hk; Rita Frieske, rita.frieske@ust.
hk; Tiezheng Yu, tyuah@connect.ust.hk; Dan Su, dsu@connect.ust.hk; Yan Xu, yxucb@connect.ust.hk; Etsuko Ishii,
eishii@connect.ust.hk; Yejin Bang, yjbang@connect.ust.hk; Delong Chen, delong.chen@connect.ust.hk; Wenliang Dai,
wdaiai@connect.ust.hk; Ho Shu Chan, hschanav@connect.ust.hk; Andrea Madotto, amadotto@connect.ust.hk; Pascale Fung,
pascale@ece.ust.hk, Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE), Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong.
. 0360-0300/2022/2-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: February 2022.

