Meta-Cognitive Analysis: Evaluating Declarative and Procedural
Knowledge in Datasets and Large Language Models
Zhuoqun Li1,3 , Hongyu Lin1 , Yaojie Lu1 , Hao Xiang1,3 , Xianpei Han1,2 , Le Sun1,2,B
1

Chinese Information Processing Laboratory 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lizhuoqun2021,hongyu,luyaojie,xianghao2022,xianpei,sunle}@iscas.ac.cn
Abstract
Declarative knowledge and procedural knowledge are two key parts in meta-cognitive theory, and these two hold
significant importance in pre-training and inference of LLMs. However, a comprehensive analysis comparing these
two types of knowledge is lacking, primarily due to challenges in definition, probing and quantitative assessment.
In this paper, we explore from a new perspective by providing ground-truth knowledge for LLMs and evaluating the
effective score. Through extensive experiments with widely-used datasets and models, we get conclusions: (1)
In most tasks, benefits from declarative knowledge are greater than those from procedural knowledge. (2) Profits
of procedural knowledge are larger than declarative knowledge only in reasoning tasks with simple logic. (3) As
pre-training progresses and size increases, model ability to utilize both kinds of knowledge significantly improves,
but in different speed. We do detailed analysis for the findings and this can provide primary guidance for evaluation
and enhancement of large language models.
Keywords: large language model, declarative knowledge, procedural knowledge

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) have been noteworthy, with models such
as GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023), Llama (Touvron et al.,
2023a) and Vicuna (Chiang et al., 2023) leading
the way. These models are capable of solving
various NLP tasks through an autoregressive approach and have show impressive performance
(Ye et al., 2023; Bang et al., 2023). This evolution of LLMs has push NLP into a new era, moving
away from traditional task-specific pre-train finetuning paradigm (Zhao et al., 2023).
According to metacognitive theories (Brown,
1987; Jacobs and Paris, 1987), there are two kinds
of knowledge that critically contributes to the cognition of human beings: declarative knowledge
and procedural knowledge. Declarative knowledge refers to “knowing that”. It encompasses
facts, concepts, and information that can be explicitly verbalized or described (Ryle, 1945, 2009). For
instance, knowing the capital of France is Paris or
understanding the concept of gravity is declarative
knowledge. Procedural knowledge, on the other
hand, refers to “knowing how”. It pertains to skills
and procedures that we might not be able to verbalize explicitly but can demonstrate through action
(Ryle, 1945, 2009). For example, knowing how
to ride a bike, play a musical instrument, or swim
are all forms of procedural knowledge. This type
of knowledge is typically acquired through practice
and repetition and is believed to involve the basal
ganglia and cerebellum in the brain. Declarative
B Corresponding Author

and procedural knowledge are at the core of human cognition, underpinning our ability to function,
learn, and adapt in various environments.
For large language models, many previous work
has confirmed the existence of declarative and
procedural knowledge in them. For declarative
knowledge, it has been observed that LLMs are
encoded with declarative knowledge across many
domains (Zhong et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2023),
which is learned from the pre-training on vast portions of Internet. For procedural knowledge, many
researches have found that LLMs exhibit an understanding of processes or sequences of actions,
to an extent. For instance, they can generate
code snippets, describe step-by-step instructions,
or help with problem-solving in certain domains,
which significantly contribute to their ability to resolve complicated tasks (Gao et al., 2022; Wei
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023).
Despite acknowledgment of their existence and
significance within LLMs (Wei et al., 2023; Shi
et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023), there is a marked
absence of systematic exploration into how these
two kinds of knowledge exert on the capabilities
of LLMs. This oversight considerably hampers
our comprehensive understanding of large model
dynamics and effective improvement of LLM abilities in certain tasks, domain and scenarios. A potential explanation for this absence stems from inherent challenges associated with formulating and
probing these two kinds of knowledge and quantitatively assessing their implications on LLMs, respectively because of the black box nature of
LLMs. Therefore, it is challenging to determine

11222
LREC-COLING 2024, pages 11222–11228
20-25 May, 2024. © 2024 ELRA Language Resource Association: CC BY-NC 4.0

