Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts
Nelson F. Liu1∗ Kevin Lin2 John Hewitt1
Michele Bevilacqua3 Fabio Petroni3
1

Stanford University, USA 2 University of California, Berkeley, USA
3
Samaya AI, UK 4 Samaya AI, USA
nfliu@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

used to process long documents (legal or scientific documents, conversation histories, etc.) or
when language models are augmented with external information (relevant documents from a search
engine, database query results, etc.; Petroni et al.,
2020; Ram et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2023; Mallen
et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023, inter alia).
Handling these use-cases requires language
models to successfully operate over long sequences. Existing language models are generally
implemented with Transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017), which require memory and compute that
increases quadratically in sequence length. As
a result, Transformer language models were often trained with relatively small context windows
(between 512 and 2048 tokens). Recent improvements in hardware (e.g., faster GPUs with more
memory) and algorithms (Dai et al., 2019; Dao
et al., 2022; Poli et al., 2023; Rubin and Berant,
2023, inter alia) have resulted in language models
with larger context windows (e.g., 4096, 32K, and
even 100K tokens), but it remains unclear how
these extended-context language models make
use of their input contexts when performing
downstream tasks.
We empirically investigate this question via
controlled experiments with a variety of state-ofthe-art open (MPT-30B-Instruct, LongChat-13B
(16K)) and closed (OpenAI’s GPT-3.5-Turbo and
Anthropic’s Claude-1.3) language models in settings that require accessing and using information
within an input context. In particular, our experiments make controlled changes to the input
context size and the position of the relevant
information within the input context and study
their effects on language model performance. If
language models can robustly use information
within long input contexts, then their performance
should be minimally affected by the position of
the relevant information in the input context.

While recent language models have the ability to take long contexts as input, relatively
little is known about how well they use
longer context. We analyze the performance
of language models on two tasks that require identifying relevant information in their
input contexts: multi-document question answering and key-value retrieval. We find that
performance can degrade significantly when
changing the position of relevant information,
indicating that current language models do not
robustly make use of information in long input contexts. In particular, we observe that
performance is often highest when relevant information occurs at the beginning or end of the
input context, and significantly degrades when
models must access relevant information in
the middle of long contexts, even for explicitly
long-context models. Our analysis provides a
better understanding of how language models use their input context and provides new
evaluation protocols for future long-context
language models.

1

Ashwin Paranjape3,4
Percy Liang1

Introduction

Language models have become an important and
flexible building block in a variety of user-facing
language technologies, including conversational
interfaces, search and summarization, and collaborative writing (Shuster et al., 2022; Thoppilan
et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022, inter alia). These
models perform downstream tasks primarily via
prompting: all relevant task specification and data
to process is formatted as a textual input context,
and the model returns a generated text completion. These input contexts can contain thousands
of tokens, especially when language models are
∗

Work partially completed as an intern at Samaya AI.

157
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 12, pp. 157–173, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl a 00638
Action Editor: Luke Zettlemoyer. Submission batch: 8/2023; Revision batch: 10/2023; Published 2/2024.
c 2024 Association for Computational Linguistics. Distributed under a CC-BY 4.0 license.


