Alice in Wonderland: Simple Tasks Showing Complete
Reasoning Breakdown in State-Of-the-Art Large
Language Models

arXiv:2406.02061v5 [cs.LG] 5 Mar 2025

Marianna Nezhurina1,2,4∗ Lucia Cipolina-Kun1,2,3 Mehdi Cherti1,2,4 Jenia Jitsev1,2,4∗
1
LAION 2 Juelich Supercomputing Center (JSC), Research Center Juelich (FZJ)
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol
4
Open-Ψ (Open-Sci) Collective
∗
Corresponding authors: {m.nezhurina,j.jitsev}@fz-juelich.de,contact@laion.ai

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) are often described as being instances of foundation models - that is, models that possess strong generalization and therefore
transfer robustly across various tasks and conditions in few-shot or zero-shot manner, while exhibiting scaling laws that predict generalization improvement when
increasing the pre-training scale. Such claims rely on measurements by various
standardized benchmarks that suppose to reflect core functions like generalization
and reasoning, where state-of-the-art (SOTA) models score high. We demonstrate
here a dramatic breakdown of generalization and basic reasoning of all SOTA
models which claim strong function, including advanced models like GPT-4 or
Claude 3 Opus trained at the largest scales, using a simple, short common sense
problem formulated in concise natural language, easily solvable by humans (AIW
problem). The breakdown is dramatic as it manifests on a simple problem in both
low average performance and strong performance fluctuations on natural variations
in problem template that do not change either problem structure or its difficulty at
all. By testing models on further control problems with similar form, we rule out
that breakdown might be rooted in minor low-level issues like natural language or
numbers parsing. We also observe strong overconfidence in the wrong solutions,
expressed in form of plausible sounding explanation-like confabulations. Various
standard interventions in an attempt to get the right solution, like chain-of-thought
prompting, or urging the models to reconsider the wrong solutions again by multi
step re-evaluation, fail. We use these observations to stimulate re-assessment of
the capabilities of current generation of LLMs as claimed by standardized benchmarks. Such re-assessment also requires common action to create standardized
benchmarks that would allow proper detection of such deficits in generalization and
reasoning that obviously remain undiscovered by current state-of-the-art evaluation
procedures, where SOTA LLMs manage to score high. 1 .

1

Introduction

In the recent breakthroughs in transferable learning that were achieved in various classical domains
of machine learning like visual recognition [1] or language understanding [2, 3, 4], large language
models (LLMs) have played a very prominent role. The generic form and scalability of autoregressive
language modelling [4] allowed to push towards training scales not achievable before with conventional supervised label-based learning. Scaling laws derived from experiments on smaller scales
1

Code for reproducing experiments in the paper and raw experiments data can be found at AIW repo

Preprint. Under review.

