How Language Model Hallucinations Can Snowball

Muru Zhang 1 Ofir Press 2 3 William Merrill 4 Alisa Liu 1 Noah A. Smith 1 5

Abstract
A major risk of using language models in practical applications is their tendency to hallucinate
incorrect statements. Hallucinations are often attributed to knowledge gaps in LMs, but we show
that LMs sometimes produce hallucinations that
they can separately recognize as incorrect. To
do this, we construct three question-answering
datasets where LMs often state an incorrect answer which is followed by an explanation with
at least one incorrect claim. Crucially, we find
that GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and LLaMA2-70B-chat
can identify 67%, 87%, and 94% of these incorrect claims, respectively. We show that this
phenomenon doesn’t disappear under higher temperatures sampling, beam search, and zero-shot
chain-of-thought prompting. These findings reveal that LM hallucinations can snowball: early
mistakes by an LM can lead to more mistakes that
otherwise would not be made.1

Figure 1. GPT-4 mistakenly claims that 9677 is not prime, followed
by an incorrect explanation that 13 × 745 = 9677. We refer to this
factorization as a snowballed hallucination, as GPT-4 appears to
“know” that 13 is not a factor of 9677 when asked separately. Thus,
hallucinations are not necessarily reflective of a model’s lack of
“knowledge,” but may be induced by an earlier hallucination for
consistency.

1. Introduction
Language models are increasingly being deployed to interface with humans in open-ended information-seeking and
problem-solving settings. Despite their diverse capabilities
and extreme fluency, a major open challenge is that LMs
still hallucinate by making up facts or citing sources that do
not exist (Maynez et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023), often while
sounding extremely plausible.

hallucinate when they do not “know” a fact? We present a
setting where LMs often generate hallucinations that they
immediately recognize as wrong when presented in isolation.
Specifically, after an LM answers a question incorrectly, it
usually justifies that answer by making incorrect assertions
that it separately acknowledges as incorrect (Figure 1).
To study this behavior empirically, we automatically construct three question-answering (QA) datasets. These
datasets span different domains: determining whether a
number is prime, whether there is a U.S. senator satisfying
two given constraints, and whether two cities are connected
given a set of flights between cities. Empirically, we find
that GPT-3.5 (OpenAI, 2022) and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023)
commit to an answer (Yes/No) with the first token over
95% of the time, and LLaMA-2-70B-chat often commit to
an answer within the first few tokens; these answers are often incorrect, and then followed by an incorrect explanation.
Increasing the temperature when sampling from the model
or using beam search doesn’t alleviate this behavior. Yet,
when presented with the incorrect explanation alone, we

Hallucination is commonly attributed to knowledge gaps in
LMs (Zheng et al., 2023), motivating mitigation strategies
through retrieval over knowledge bases (Lewis et al., 2020;
Shuster et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2023). But do LMs only
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington 2 Princeton University 3 Princeton Language and Intelligence 4 Center for Data Science, New York University 5 Allen Institude for AI. Correspondence to: Muru Zhang
<nanami17@cs.washington.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
1
Data and code can be found at https://github.com/
Nanami18/Snowballed_Hallucination

1

